---
title: Empty Religion
---

There's an Irish joke that runs as follows:

> A journalist, researching for an article on the complex political
situation in Northern Ireland, was in a pub in a war-torn area of
Belfast. One of his potential informants leaned over his pint of Guinness
and suspiciously cross-examined the journalist: "Are you a Catholic or a
Protestant?" the Irishman asked.
>
>"Neither," replied the journalist; "I'm an atheist."
>
>The Irishman, not content with this answer, put a further question: "Ah,
but are you a Catholic atheist or a Protestant atheist?

This joke resonated with me when I first heard it and it still does.  I
think it's both funny and profound.  Funny for obvious reasons, profound
because it succinctly illuminates the importance people attach to labels.

Despite a nominally Catholic upbringing, I used to identify with the
reporter in that joke.  I go even further; not only am I an atheist, but I'm
also pro choice, pro contraception and pro gay marriage.  You'd think that
disagreeing with pretty much all of the Church core beliefs and being an out
and out *atheist* would disqualify me from any kind of "Catholic" label,
right?

You'd *think* that this would be enough - and then you read an article like
[Raised Catholic][2] from [tvtropes.org][3] and you begin to wonder if it's
really that simple.  The title quote from that article stands out:

>I wouldn't be a very spiritual man, right. I don't believe in God,
right. Still Catholic. Because there's nothing you can do when you're
Catholic. Once you've started Catholic, frankly, there's no real way to stop
being Catholic. Even not believing in God isn't regarded as sufficient
reason to get out of the Catholic Church.

It's kind of a scary thought, but it does explain why a lot of the people I
grew up with still identify as Catholic, even while not giving a second
thought to buying a pack of condoms at the drugstore.

They are, I suppose, what one would call "cultural Catholics".  Like the
related "cultural Jew", who doesn't really keep the Sabbath *but* who still
identifies as Jewish, still visits their family and goes to temple on high
holidays, and who still (I imagine) waxes poetic about their Grandmother's
gefilte fish and matzo ball soup, the cultural Catholic doesn't go to
Confession, and doesn't really pay much attention to Catholic dogma *but*
still identifies as Catholic and still visits family and goes to Mass on
Sundays (or at least Christmas and Easter).  The cultural Catholic treats
the Church as more of a social club than a place of worship.

So am I a cultural Catholic?  As I said before, I never thought so.  I
haven't been to Mass in years.  I don't wear a crucifix (anymore).  I'm not
particularly close to my family.

And yet...I *do* celebrate Christmas and Easter.  The days are usually
marked with a visit to my Mom and with a meal that isn't usually eaten the
rest of the year (often lasagna or veal).  Every year, I set up and decorate
a Christmas tree.  I exchange gifts.  If this isn't culturally Catholic, or
least culturally Christian, I don't know what is.

I went to Catholic school for twelve years.  I was baptized, confirmed, and
at one time in my life (a long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away) was a
weekly Churchgoer.  I suppose it would be naive of me to imagine that I came
out the other end of that experience unscathed.

Catholics say that baptism leaves an indelible mark on your soul. So what
kind of mark did it leave on mine?

## Catholic Atheism

What does a Catholic atheist look like?  How is such a creature different
from a non-Catholic atheist?  It's hard for me to say offhand, because it's
hard for me to look at the person I am now and trace a line from him to my
past.  It can be tricky for me to separate the Catholic bits from the normal
bits, because it *all* seemed normal at the time and, to some extent, still
seems normal.

It's like, didn't *everyone* learn about Jesus and the Trinity in school?
What do you mean, no?  It takes a bit of introspection to realize that
certain things which seem perfectly normal to a Catholic must seem well and
truly bizarre to others.

One way to approach the problem is to ask different but related questions.
What, for example, does a Jewish atheist look like?  Or a Muslim atheist?
Or a Mormon atheist?

I don't know the answers to those questions either, but I can start
hazarding guesses.  I *imagine*, for example, that a Jewish atheist might
still avoid pork - not for religious reasons, of course, but for that most
prosaic and cliched of reasons: that old habits die hard.  If you were
brought up avoiding bacon, then maybe you continue to avoid bacon into
adulthood, even if the gesture no longer has any religious significance.

By the same token, I imagine that Muslim atheists might still avoid alcohol.
They might still wear a headscarf. They might be more inclined to take a
story with genies in it a bit more seriously then the rest of us (even if
they don't literally believe in the existence of genies).

And a Catholic atheist?  Well, maybe this hypothetical creature sees no
reason to stop eating fish on Fridays, if that's what they've always done.
Maybe they would never, ever consider having an abortion, even while firmly
believing that every woman has the right to choose.

Maybe the Catholic atheist wears a crucifix, because he always has, and
doesn't really think about what it represents.

