Title: The Difference between Murder and Suicide

I once got into a relatively lively email debate with a friend of mine
concerning the nature of free will.  My life is weird sometimes.  One of us
argued that we had it and the other argued that we didn't. The exchange
ended when he sent me an email explaining that he was agitated and losing
sleep over the matter.

People hear that story and often assume that my friend was the one who
believed in free will and that I was one who didn't but in reality the
reverse was true.  I believed in free will; my friend did not.

To this day I'm not 100% sure why he got so agitated but if I had to make an
educated guess, I'd say it had to do with a misinterpretation of my views.
I suspect he thought I was spouting some sort of mystical new age nonsense
and this (rightly) irritated him.  If I'm right, that's unfortunate, because
that's about as far away from my views as you can get.

Let me be clear: I don't believe in or practice mysticism of any kind. But I
do believe in free will. In retrospect, I can see how this stance might be
confusing. At least one of my friends has called it "strange".

# Traditional Dichotomies

The free will debate is conventionally framed as a contest between free will
and determinism. Traditionally, these are understood to be mutually
exclusive. Believing in determinism means believing that we live in a kind
of "clockwork" universe, where one event cause another in an endless chain.
In this kind of universe, a person's "choices" are really just another kind
of physical event, with a physical cause. There's no room in this framework
for the operation of a person's "will".  What would it even look like?
Where exactly would it fit amongst all the swirling particles?

Nowadays, of course, quantum physics has pretty much shown determinism the
door. Most interpretations of quantum physics state that movement of
particles is to a large degree completely random - or, put more bluntly,
that the universe isn't at all deterministic. For a while, people thought
that this fact could breathe new life into the notion of free will but as
the years went on it became clear that there was no easy way to make it
work. Saying that one's "choices" are the results of random fluctuations in
the universe hardly seems any better than saying that they are the result of
a series of determined causes.

In any case, the exact science hardly matters. Whether the universe is
deterministic or indeterministic is beside the point - the point being that
if you subscribe to this kind of framework, believing in free will means
believing that human beings somehow have the ability to step outside the
laws of physics when they make a choice. As it is virtually impossible to
describe how such an act is even conceivable, this belief tends to be
equated with a belief in miracles.
