---
title: Putting "Meta" In Front of Words Makes Them Sound Cooler, Right?
---

One time, back when I was actually semi-active on Google+, I came across a
rather heated debate.  Someone had posted an [article][1] telling the story
of a child bride who had died on her wedding night.  The article was
directed at self-described proponents of "multiculturalism", an ideology
which, in the poster's opinion, was in the same category as "cultural
relativism", which he considered morally depraved.

Interestingly, the debate didn't center around whether child marriage was a
horrific practice that needed to be roundly condemned in the harshest terms
possible - pretty much everyone was on the same page on that score - but
rather around the original poster's insistence on conflating
"multiculturalism" and "cultural relativism".  He wasn't the only one who
considered the latter to be an evil philosophy.

One of these days I'm going to write something about how people can become
emotionally attached to, or emotionally repelled by, certain charged
combinations of words.  Think of terms like "euthanasia" or "rape" or "life"
or "free will" or "consciousness" and you'll know what I mean.  The original
poster, in this case, had an emotional attachment to his own notion of
"multiculturalism" and seemed unwilling to entertain the idea that other
people might use the word differently.  I, for example, subscribe to a
philosophy that I call "multiculturalism", and yet I have no problem
condemning sati or child marriage.

I don't know the exact, academic definition of "cultural relativism".  The
everyday one off which I tend to base my opinions is that it's a version of
"ethical relativism".  It's the idea that you can't really categorize
cultures or, perhaps more importantly, cultural *practices*, as "good" or
"bad".  Or, to put it more bluntly, it's the idea that one cannot label
female circumcision, or child marriage, or sati as evil because, well,
that's just how they do things over there and who are we to judge?

I'll say it flat out: if *that's* your definition of "multiculturalism",
then it's not a philosophy to which I subscribe - but, then again, I don't
know anyone who does.

I'm no expert, but I believe this is what is called a "straw man" argument.
One defines a concept in a certain way that you can't help but condemn it,
but which bears little resemblance to way the concept is usually used.

All that being said, here's where it gets a little hazy and here's where I
can see some people misconstruing my beliefs.

Like most rational people, I'm unwilling to judge an entire culture by the
presence of a few bad apples but, more than that, I'm also unwilling to
judge an entire culture by the presence of a few bad *practices*.  To me,
the term "multiculturalism" unpacks to something resembling a form of
libertarianism: a kind of marketplace or buffet of cultures, where you get
to pick and choose the best (or at least neutral) bits from each, and reject
the rest.

Female circumcision is evil.  Praying five times a day facing Mecca is not.
Accepting one does not mean accepting the other.  Despite the rhetoric some
people use, cultures are not *monolithic*; they are not *package deals*.
Recognizing this truth isn't ethical or cultural relativism in the sense
that I understand it.  I'm very willing to label certain cultural practices
(sati, etc.), and the people who observe them, as unambiguously evil.  But
I'm unwilling to *define* an entire culture by its unsavory elements.  I
simply try to pick the wheat from the chaff, so to speak.

## The Metaculture

I'll go even further and say that I'm a firm believer 


[1]: http://www.upi.com/Top_News/World-News/2013/09/08/8-year-old-Yemeni-girl-dies-from-internal-injuries-on-wedding-night/UPI-61081378653499/?spt=hs&or=tn
