The Cultureless

I don't really consider myself Canadian.

Well, that's not entirely true.  It does say "Canada" on my passport, so
there's that.  If you ask me what my nationality is, I'll say Canadian.  If
you call me an American, I'll politely correct you.  I mean, everybody's got
to be from somewhere, right?  I'm from Canada.

But I'm not "Canadian" in the same way that many people consider themselves,
say, French or British or Indian.  Being Canadian doesn't form a big part of
identity the way being Chinese or Quebecois does for some others.  I don't
consider myself Italian, despite the fact that my mother was born in Sicily.
I've never felt a strong desire to go "back to my roots".  It rarely occurs
to me to care.

And I always feel vaguely silly when the Olympics roll around.  I'm happy
enough when Canada wins something but, in all seriously, what does this have
to do with me?

George Carlin has this bit where he talks about ethic pride:

> I'm fully Irish, and when I was a kid I would go to the St Patrick's Day
parade and they sold a button that said "Proud to be Irish", but I knew that
on Columbus day they sold the same button only it said "Proud to be
Italian", then came Black Pride, and Puerto Rican Pride. And I could never
understand national or ethnic pride, because to me Pride should be reserved
for something you achieve on your own.

>Being Irish isn't a skill, it's a fucking genetic accident.

>You wouldn't be proud to be 5'11". You wouldn't be proud to have a
pre-disposition for colon cancer.

I think he nailed it.  I could not have said it any better.

I don't know exactly why I'm like this.  It could just be that I'm a child
of Canada's explicit multicultural policy - one of the first countries in
the world to adopt it as such.  Or maybe I'm like this because I spent a lot
of my formative years in Toronto.  It's a place where literally half the
population consists of people who were born in a different country, where
the term "visible *minority*" will soon be a misnomer and where caucassians
are just another ethic group.  Growing up there influences your perspectives
on culture and race.

I do know that, for whatever reason, Canadian culture is, if not exactly
non-existent, at least very...muted.  And, to lay out all my cards on the
table...I *like* it that way.

No, we have something much, much better than a strong national culture.  We
have a cultural *vaccuum* into which flows every other culture in the world.
Lacking a strong culture of our own, we've adopted everyone else's.  They're
all here, ripe for the picking, and let me tell you something straight from
the heart: it's *beautiful*.

In a nutshell, being Canadian means that I get to define who I am, in a way
that goes deeper than if I were, for example, Indian or Japanese.  Being
exposed to a multitude of cultures, without being brought up in any
particular one, means that I get to pick and choose the bits that I like
from each, without feeling like I'm betraying anything.  This is what Canada
gives me, and I'm grateful.  To use George Carlin's terms, I'm *happy* to be
a Canadian, if not exactly proud.

Some will say that I lack a sense of identity.  This isn't true.  I have
what I consider to be a rather strong sense of identity.  I have a good
sense of what my strengths and weaknesses are, of what and who I like and
don't like.  It's just that this sense of identity doesn't revolve around
something as random as where I was born or - even more absurd - where my
*parents* were born.

In that a contradiction?  That I'm grateful for being born in a country that
doesn't provide the same level of cultural baggage I've come to expect from
some other countries?  I don't think it is.  I consider it a Good Thing.

Have you ever tried Lutefisk?  It's a Scandinavian specialty - dried, salted
fish, rendered gelatenous by the application of lye.  By [all
accounts](http://kcbx.net/~tellswor/lutefisk.htm) it's utterly horrid stuff,
and I'm willing to bet that most Scandinavians think so as well.  I'm also
willing to bet that a large number of Scandinivians eat it anyway, not
because they like it, but because they're *supposed to* like it.  Because,
you know, they're Scandinavian, right?  It would be un-Scandinavian of them
not to like Lutefisk!

This is stupid.  Utterly, completely, stupid, in every conceivable
way. *Irredemably* stupid.
